This book snuck up on me. Tricky tricky. It started out interesting enough. Proulx's writing style is mesmerizing, almost hypnotic. I found the book initially to be a relaxing solace on my commute home after a busy day of work, soley because of its use of language and setting. But I hated the characters. All of them. Quoyle, a big, damp loaf of a man, as Proulx describes him, is the definition of pathetic. His daughters are brats. And his wife Petal is a two-dimensional device created solely as a catalyst for the story to come. In the beginning it felt a little forced. Then at some point in the second half, the book went from a nice little read to a ferocious page-turner, and I still am not sure how it became so compelling. There was no melodramatic conflict introduced. No secret codes to be found in paintings. Instead, Proulx builds her momentum slowly, slowly, taking you deeper into the lives of these characters, who started out so hard, unattractive, broken, and nasty. The thing of it is, they start to feel so honest. Before you know it, their presence is comforting. I found I wanted to be with them. Wanted to be in the boat with Quoyle. Wanted to see the green house. Wanted to go to the Christmas Pageant. Wanted to eat flipper pie with him and the girls. Wanted to welcome Aunt home. Quoyle finds redemption from a place that itself is bleak, full of hardship, and dying. I found this to be poetic and strangely uplifting. Its sort of the anti-coming of age story. No beautiful starry-eyed twentysomething trotting off to exotic locations or big cities here. Instead, the story of a middle-aged man who hates himself even more than he hates his circumstance, moving back to his modest roots, finding a lot of darkness in the places he comes from. He watches people fall on hard times and move away, endures monotony, deep cold, harsh storms and odd, forced relationships. And in the midst of it he finds friendship, love, and his own self-worth. I just thought it was beautiful. The scene near the end in which Quoyle prepares to attend the wake for one of his close friends, looks at his gigantic naked body in the mirror, and feels a surge of joy to be such an honest and satisfying moment of redemption. This dying place brings him to life, and eventually, for the first time in his life, he finds joy and peace. And he finds it in himself, not in the circumstances around him. It snuck up on me. I didn't realize until it was too late how hard I had fallen for this lot.
A love story of a single father, a newspaper reporter, who returns to Newfoundland to live in an ancestral home and meets a local woman. Everyone in the present is haunted in some way by victims claimed by nature in the past, usually by the sea. The plot revolves around ordinary characters - ordinary, quirky Newfies, that is. They are overweight or pock-marked or not quite attractive, in that left-behind kind of way They are all damaged in some way, usually by the loss of loved ones to nature. But the characters are small specks against the giant backdrop of rock, sea and storms. I'll call this an "environmental novel" of Newfoundland. Man and woman against nature. We think of an island as the intersection of land and water - two systems - but it's really the intersection of three great earth systems - land, water and atmosphere. Here we see Mother Nature in all her glory inflicting herself on the puny inhabitants of this rock coast. Wind, rain, waves, snow, storms, ice, seafoam, icebergs are really the main characters. Shipping News is the antithesis of the beach book. This is one for a good winter read by the fireplace or under the electric blanket.Photos of Newfoundland:Top from CBC on Facebookmiddle from expedia.combottom from newfoundlandlabrador.com[Pictures added 4/11/22; edited for typos 8/17/23]
Easily one of my favorites. I did all I could to ignore the film when it came out and I recommend that you do the same. Book can be a bit hard to get into, but it's worth it. Somehow Proulx creates a landscape and a love story that are both sweet and stark.
“The Shipping News” is E. Annie Proulx’s second novel, published back in 1993. The book won the Pulitzer Prize and the National Book Award. She has a unique voice and her command of language is impressive. The strength of this book is her prose and strong sense of place. She writes in short staccato sentences, sometimes even using incomplete phrases, but with such inventive and fitting language. She seems to have a vast vocabulary but uses rare words sparingly. Her unpretentious talent is more from finding creative uses of everyday words. This talent is fitting for a story that largely takes place in a sparse, inhospitable place, with simple characters and results in real depth underneath these humble characters and locals.The story follows Quoyle, a hulk of a man, who’s life begins with dysfunction and tragedy. He is a man adrift in upstate New York, deadened from abuse and ill treatment. The only positive thing he receives from his early life and broken marriage to an unfaithful and dreadful wife, is two daughters. An Aunt, Angis Hamm, convinces Quoyle to return to his ancestral home in Newfoundland where he finds work on the local newspaper. This is where the story really finds solid ground with Proulx deftly describing the local culture, language, and harsh climate of Newfoundland. If there is a weakness in this book, it’s that the striking language, and intriguing side observations tended to distract me from the story line. There were moments where I became lost in the story and needing to backtrack or accept that I was lost for a bit, until I found enough clues to navigate back to familiar waters. While several key characters were fully formed, many of the secondary characters were one dimensional and never took shape in my mind. However, the strength of the prose and the rich setting were enough to keep me engaged throughout the entire story. There was just enough struggle and heartbreak to drive the story and we see real change in Quoyle. I finished “The Shipping News” feeling that Proulx is a better writer than character builder and story teller. But I still believe she’s a talent and this is an important work. There is such great connection between her language skills and the setting and people of this book. The desolate location, angry ocean, and gritty town feel like the best, most recognizable character in the book, if that makes sense. Worthy of its acclaim and awards, I give it four and a half stars, rounded to five. An artistic tale of small triumphs and personal growth perched in the richly layered backdrop of a seaside northern town.
During the years that I was the manager of a business, I had the wonderful good fortune to have on staff many people originally from Newfoundland. One aspect that I found fascinating is the similarities between that relatively small ‘rock’ and my holiday in southwest England many years ago. In England, I noticed that accents and the way certain things were said changed about every five miles. The same is true with Newfoundland. Definitions and phrases are different depending on where people lived. The most interesting part is that even though they would use different terms for the same things, they could still understand each other! Well, it’s all English after all.This story follows a family from New York to Newfoundland where Quoyle’s family is from originally. His Aunt travels with the family and is looking forward to a new start with Quoyle and his two daughters in the place she had left behind nearly 50 years before.The writing is very different and interesting. While they are in their small town in New York, the sentences are terse, choppy – very few articles and no conjunctions. Tight, compressed sentences that reflected their tight, compressed existence.When they arrive at their destination, everything changes – the sentences gradually grow and expand. There are poetic turns of phrase mingled with the mangled English of the Newfoundlanders. Quoyle, a would-be journalist starts to turn out interesting articles for the newspaper whose owner still goes out fishing whenever he can.I was enthralled with the people I met while reading and when this family saga ended - of loves lost and found; of careers begun, stalled, and begun again; of friendships and warmth and caring; of dark times and sad times and cruel times and joyful times – when it all came to an end, I felt I would give anything for a few more (like 10 or 20) chapters, even though the ending is perfect.This novel won several prizes, including both the National Book Award and the Pulitzer Prize. It is always a pleasure to me when a book I enjoy so much is given accolades and recognition, and this one is a perfect example.
This was one of the first twenty books I added to my to-read shelf here on Goodreads nearly eight years ago. Along the way, I somehow acquired not just one but two copies of this Pulitzer prize winning novel. Either my memory of what I own failed me, or I really wanted to read this. In any case, it was high time I grabbed one of those copies from my bookshelf! Besides, it’s so well loved, I was sure to be wild about it as well. I’m sorry to say that something went wrong here, friends. While I did respect Proulx’s work, I’m not able to write a gushing review of it! I’m kind of stumped to explain exactly what happened.“Here is an account of a few years in the life of Quoyle, born in Brooklyn and raised in a shuffle of dreary upstate towns.”I’m all for the everyman or everywoman story. These are the kind of characters who appear to live rather ordinary lives; nothing flashy about these people. Kent Haruf and Elizabeth Strout write some of the best, in my opinion. John Williams’s Stoner comes to mind immediately as well. There’s a quality to their writing that makes me feel as if there is indeed something remarkable about these quiet folks after all. Their humanity shines through. I just didn’t feel it here, and I’m having difficulty pointing out why. Perhaps it’s all due to the writing style? Much of this novel is written in fragmented, choppy sentences - the sort your former high school English teacher would have gleefully marked up with the dreaded red pen in hand. Not that I mind this unconventional approach as a rule. I felt it lacked a kind of warmth here that would have been the perfect counterbalance to the stormy, frigid atmosphere of the Newfoundland setting. “At last the end of the world, a wild place that seemed poised on the lip of the abyss. No human sign, nothing, no ship, no plane, no animal, no bird, no bobbing trap marker nor buoy. As though he stood alone on the planet. The immensity of sky roared at him and instinctively he raised his hands to keep it off. Translucent thirty-foot combers the color of bottles crashed onto stone, coursed bubbles into a churning lake of milk shot with cream.”The setting is what truly stole the show for me entirely – that and the description of the old homestead, going back generations through the Quoyles, a family with a rather colorful, infamous history. Newfoundland is on my long list of places to visit someday. Proulx’s powerful descriptions went a long way in putting some stunning images in my mind’s eye. I wish that more of the plot had transpired at the old house. It was to this home that the protagonist, Quoyle, had fled with his two little girls and an aunt after misadventure and catastrophe struck. There was a delicious sense of foreboding whenever the house was described – I love it when a place becomes nearly like a living and breathing entity. My wish was not to be fully granted, however. A bit of a disappointment, I admit. I would have happily spent many more days beneath that nightmarish roof. I wanted more of this:“The house was heavy around him, the pressure of the past filling the rooms like odorless gas. The sea breathed in the distance… But the house was wrong… Dragged by human labor across miles of ice, the outcasts straining against the ropes and shouting curses at the godly mob. Winched onto the rock. Groaning. A bound prisoner straining to get free. The humming of the taut cables. That vibration passed into the house, made it seem alive… he was inside a tethered animal, dumb but feeling. Swallowed by the shouting past.”There’s a motley crew of characters besides the Quoyle family. They were well described, but I can’t say I ever latched onto a single one of them. There are some unhappy and tragic pasts that are revealed. I swear I’m not completely heartless, but these failed to move me! I was fully inspired by at least three more novels before this one. Let’s just say that Anais Barbeau-Lavalette, Jeanette Winterson and Annie Ernaux are at least partly to blame for my lackluster response to The Shipping News. My apologies to Annie Proulx who through no fault of her own failed to seduce me as these three women writers did. I know I’m in the unpopular minority with my three star rating, but I’ve always said I believe in second chances. I have a collection of her short stories waiting for another day.“All the complex wires of life were stripped out and he could see the structure of life. Nothing but rock and sea, the tiny figures of humans and animals against them for a brief time.”
Like with almost every other Pulitzer darling, we accompany the protagonist for the entire ride, & this one is exceptionally literary in that brave, EveryMan-type way. This: the prototype for the ever ambitious, ever elusive Great (semi)American Novel in which the elements of clever prose, revamped/revisited personal histories, of second chances and redemption, are outstandingly clear and pitched at full blast. Many novels read like this, and usually the one in that particular year earns itself magnanimous acclaim. Yes, it tries to do everything right. But why is this not a contemporary classic (ahem, "Middlesex")? Because, after all, as the drama becomes more elevated, the protagonist becomes somewhat... uninteresting. As the atmosphere becomes a desolated (desperate?) return to simplicity, the token characters pile on--the thesis being that with more people around the sadness which is omnipresent is diminished. The only way to succeed in life is to partake in it. Bottom line.No, this one is not without its problems--this is not Graham Greene, it is not Toni Morrison, it is not Geoffrey Eugenides, after all. Alas, it suffers from similar ailments shared by other Pulitzer winners: it is, at times, a tad too superficial ("A Visit from the Goon Squad"); somewhat dull-ish, small, insignificantish ("Breathing Lessons"); dense ("American Pastoral") or even a little too long, overdone (sorry--"Loneseome Dove"). & it is thoroughly enjoyable, too. (Which is NEVER a detractor from the overall experience.)P.S. Several surprises await (in the last 12 pages) those readers who manage to reach the end. So... GET THERE, people.
My initial review of this book was simply "Bullllshiiit", but, um, perhaps more explanation is deserved. After a handful of people whose taste I respect raved about this book, I was looking forward to it, and got to page 180 or so before finally admitting "This feels like a chore" and giving it away (and I *rarely* leave books unfinished).What got to me about this book was mainly Proulx's style was too...forced. Nothing that occured felt real or believed by the author herself (and it's not that I demand "realism"; One Hundred Years of Solitude is one of my favorites). It's that I felt like I could see the mechanisms behind all of her "tricks"...the anecdotes that characters told felt like ideas Proulx kept on a notepad before compiling them together for this novel. It read like the final project from a brilliant student finishing a course on creative writing. I'm not saying Proulx isn't a good *writer*...but I don't see her as a storyteller.
A book about knots. You know, nautical knots, fisherman's knots, each chapter beginning with a sketch of the intricate knot and its name.And I can only tie my shoes. On a good day.I don't remember nautical terms. They are lost on me. Always have been. If the ship goes down, it's going down with me. But I know knots. A knot at the base of my throat, an edgy knot taking over my stomach, a knot where my colon used to be. And, reading this unnerving masterpiece, you feel the knots. Because disaster looms in every page of this beauty. Disaster. A little like life, but worse. Life in Newfoundland.Horrible, near-grotesque people. People you would never want to know, or date. Food I would never touch, outside of starvation. And OUTSTANDING writing, as in STANDS OUT from anything I've ever read in my life. Luminous, poetic, inspired writing. As good as Morrison or Faulkner, but funny, too. I shook my head in awe, shook my head on every page, as I swallowed around the knots in my neck.This novel left me shipwrecked.
The Shipping News is a wonderful read. We are introduced to Quoyle and follow him from his life and failed marriage in Mockingburg (!), New York through to his move and settling into Newfoundland with his two daughters, Bunny and Sunshine. There is a nearly Dostoyevski-level of tragedy underpinning the story - sexual assault, perversion, violence - which litters the road Quoyle travels down. There are a few innovative aspects to the text itself, the names and the grammar. Annie Proulx comes up with some of the most original names I have ever seen (Tert Card! Bunny! Partridge!) and this helps make the text more memorable and fun. The staccato sentence structure where she often drops the subject is a clever way of dropping us into a pseudo-interior dialog inside Quoyle's head. These two features give a unique dynamic to Proulx's writing.At the beginning of the story, Quoyle reminded me of Ignatius J. Reilly from A Confederacy of Dunces, both physically and in terms of his lack of career, but fortunately for Quoyle, he quickly latches onto a friend, Partridge, and a career in journalism despite a rocky start. "Quoyle didn't recognize news, had no aptitude for detail. He was afraid of all but twelve or fifteen verbs. Had a fatal flair for the false passive." (p. 8). Like Ignatius or even Augie March (The Adventures of Augie March to a degree, Quoyle is desperately trying to move beyond his limitations: "In a profession that tutored its practitioners in the baseness of human nature, that revealed the corroded nature of civilization, Quoyle constructed a personal illusion of orderly progress. In atmospheres of disintegration and smoking jealousy he imagined rational compromise. (p. 10). Fortunately for him, he is able to surmount the early catastrophe with Petal and reconnect with his somewhat damaged, but still maleable kids and becomes a charming father figure. (Yes, I am skipping some detail here in an effort to avoid spoilers.)In his migration to the cold, windy north, he brings his aunt (herself full of incredible surprises) who imparts wisdom in little chunks: "As you get older you find out the place where you started out pulls at you stronger and stronger...Probably some atavistic drive to finish up where you started." (p. 30). She is going back, with great courage, to a place where she personally suffered but where she will build herself up again despite her own setbacks.I wanted to mention that another characteristic of this book that makes it exceptional is the care the author takes to give a credible and poignant backstory to nearly all of the characters. None are mere cardboard cutouts of people. Even the crazy cousin has a moment of lucidity at the end. I found this to really bring me and bind me to the story.There is a lot of comedy in the novel - on arriving in Killick-Claw, Newfoundland, the scene in the Tickle (!) Motel, Bar & Restaurant was particularly hilarious off of Route 999 (about as far from anywhere as you can imagine!): "Quoyle was the first to take a shower. Discoloured water spouted from a broken tile, seeped under the door and into the carpet. The sprinkler system dribbled as long as the cold faucet was open. His clothes slipped off the toilet and lay in the flood, for the door hooks were torn away. A Bible on a chain near the toilet, loose pages ready to fall. It was not until the next evening that he discovered that he had gone about all day with a page from Leviticus stuck to his back." (p. 55)Quoyle goes to work for the local paper, the Gammy Bird and his male colleagues are all adorably bizarre. Nutbeem, Tert, and Billy plus his boss Jack - all described with care and humor. The book gets its title from Quoyle's column, The Shipping News, where he is to gather information on comings and goings from the port and which overtime he truly excels at while he gets used to the natural beauty (and unnatural human debris) of the area. Cleaning up around his house:"When he came upon a torn plastic bag he filled it with debris. Tin cans, baby-food jars, a supermarket meat tray, torn paper cajoling the jobless reader...plastic line, the unfurled carboard tube from a roll of toilet paper. Pink tampon inserts. Behind him a profound sigh, the sigh of someone beyond hope or exasperation. Quoyle turned. A hundred feet away, a glistening back. The Minke whale rose, glided under the milky surface. He stared at the water. Again it appeared, sighed, slipped under. Roiling fog arms flew fifty feet above the sea." (p. 110). Her descriptions of nature are occasionally breathtaking like this one.In an important passage, Quoyle's colleague Billy gives him a metaphor for the schema for a man's life:"Ar, that? Let's see. Used to say there were four women in every man's heart. The Maid in the Meadow, the Demon Lover, the Stouthearted Woman, the Tall and Quiet Woman." (p. 182). While I have a hard time relating that to my own experience, it definitely correlates directly to Quoyle. The Tall and Quiet Woman is clearly the wonderful Wavey (!) and the story of she and Quoyle is another wonderful highlight to this charming book. Each chapter begins with a quote, most often from a book of knots - the rope and knots being metaphors that are used throughout the novel. I really liked the last sentence of the story as well which uses this wonderful metaphor: "Water may be older than light, diamonds crack in hot goat's blood, mountaintops give off cold fire, forests appear in mid-ocean, it may happen that a crab is caught with the shadow of a hand on its back, that the wind might be imprisoned in a bit of knotted string. And it may be that love sometimes occurs without pain or misery." (p. 355).Overall, this book was absolutely deserving of its Pulitzer Prize and made me want to read more work by this gifted author who, incidentally, was not published until she was in her 50s giving the present reviewer hope as yet! And I know I have to still see the movie with Kevin Spacey.
So far this is a great read, this book is a little gem. Had to get used to the language and the different way of storytelling, but this story, I love it so far! Finished it today and what a great book to start 2010 with. I loved it!Loved the story, the characters, the description of the surroundings and the community, the way it is written, loved everything about it. It could have gone on forever for me. This is a feel good story, at least that's how I felt it. It was on my night desk next to the bed for some time and every page I read before sleep gave me joy. Read the most of the book in London pubs. A five star, beautiful gem.
You know you're in trouble when you pan a Pulitzer prize winner, but pan I must. This book bored me to tears. Perpetual motion and its status as "currently reading" on Goodreads together got me through it. I didn't care what happened to whom or how it would end, I just wanted it over. Amazing the things that passed for excitement and were given excessive air time in this novel: an incredibly detailed rendition of the kids' Christmas pageant; knitting; the uneventful daily commute and various mostly silent car rides. Enough to make you want to shout FIRE! and see if any of these characters does anything but look around slowly, gather up his belongings--carefully--and think about that phone call he wasn't now going to get to make about that boat motor. Sheesh! Then when something interesting was happening, or happened before but was just coming up in conversation, nothing much is made of it! It's all brushed under the rug as not being worthy of the words it would have taken to adequately describe. I don't give a rat's a$$ about the detailed description of the animal paintings on the children's cocoa mugs, but I would have liked to have heard how, exactly, Mrs. Yark managed to rescue them from the total destruction of her house and her entire town. And the names--nearly every one of them strange, and (to me) irksome. I couldn't decide through the entire book how to pronounce Quoyle--with a hard C or with a Kw. Wavey reminded me of Wavy Gravy. Petal. Marty for a girl. Beety. Last names (often used alone) were bizarre as well. Nutbeem. Pretty. Quoyle (double whammy, first and last). Buggit. One review called the book "atmospheric." I'll give it that, if by Atmospheric they mean more "cold pea soup, no crackers" than "Middle Earth with Orlando Bloom." Another (this one on the back of the book), "a lyric page-turner." Whaaaa?Enough, glad its done; it drove me nuts. Good thing Proulx's Brokeback Mountain is a short story, because I still do want to read that.
